Getting started with code mods blog post (#1711)
simplabs/simplabs.github.io: _posts/2022-02-05-getting-started-wth-code-mods.md

---

> title: 'Code mods and how to get started creating your own'

Reviewer: I'd maybe include JavaScript in the title both to be clearer and it can't hurt SEO

author: 'Michael Kerr'
github: Mikek2252
twitter: Mikek2252
topic: javascript

> bio: 'The simplabs team'

Reviewer: This should be about the author so you :) We'd typically have something like _"Senior Software Engineering"_ or so here.

> description: 'A quick introduction into code mods and how to create your own'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: 'A quick introduction into code mods and how to create your own.'
```

---

> With the ever-changing landscape in web development code is forever needing to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the ever-changing landscape in web development, code is forever needing to
```

be updated, whether that be due to updates in frameworks and libraries or new

> features supported in browsers. Manually making all these updates can often be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
features supported in browsers. Manually dealing with all these updates can often be
```
I am not sure about this one, but "making" doesn't sound right to me. Do you mean you actually build the updates?

very error prone and time consuming and that is where code mods/refactoring
tools come in. Code mods are scripts that can be run on existing code,
templates, styles (pretty much anything with the correct parser and compiler)

> and identifies a pattern and then updates the code to a new pattern.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in order to identify a pattern and then update the code to a new one.
```

I believe the subject here is "Code mods" so it's plural?

<!--break-->

> For example updating the following code sample from concatenating with the +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example updating the following code sample from concatenating with the `+`
```

operator to using a template literal.

```javascript
// Before
let message = 'Hello, ' + name;
// After
let message = `Hello, ${name}`;
```

> In the Ember community we love code mods, when deprecations in the framework are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Ember community we love code mods: when deprecations in the framework are
```

> added there is a good chance that a code mod is created in order to help

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
added, there is a good chance that a code mod is created in order to help
```

> everyone migrate their code. The Ember community even have an entire github

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
everyone migrate their code. The Ember community even has an entire github
```

The community has? Or is it considered plural?

organization dedicated to code mods which you can check out here:

> https://github.com/ember-codemods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[https://github.com/ember-codemods](https://github.com/ember-codemods).
```

> But despite the already great array of code mods available there may not be one

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite the already great array of code mods available, there may not be one
```

> that covers your needs or fixes your problem, but fear not, making your own

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that covers your needs or fixes your problem. Fear not: making your own
```

isn’t as complicated as it may seem.

## Setting up your code mod project

> Creating the initial project for a code mode could not be simpler thanks to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating the initial project for a JavaScript code mode could not be simpler thanks to
```

Or can this be sued for anything really (e.g. styles, templates etc.)?

Author: Im not sure about styles but it can also generate template code mods if you pass in an additional parameter

> Creating the initial project for a code mode could not be simpler thanks to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Creating the initial project for a code mode has been made simple by
```

[Robert Jackson's](https://github.com/rwjblue)

> [codemod-cli tool](https://github.com/rwjblue/codemod-cli) all you need to do is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[codemod-cli tool](https://github.com/rwjblue/codemod-cli). What is left for you to do is
```

run the following command and you will have all your prerequisites.

```
npx codemod-cli new &lt;project-nameglt;

// TIP: Make sure to give the project a broad name as
// you can have multiple code mods in this project!.
```

> Once your project has been created make sure to `cd &lt;project-nameglt;` and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your project has been created, make sure to `cd &lt;project-nameglt;` and
```

install your dependencies via your chosen package manager.

## Creating your code mod

> Now the project has been setup and our dependences have been installed it's time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that the project has been setup and our dependences have been installed it's time
```

> to create our code mod, for this blog post we will create a rule for the string

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to create our code mod. For the purpose of this post, we will create a rule for the string
```

> concatenation with the plus operator to a template literal example I mentioned

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
concatenation with the plus operator to a template literal.
```

I'd remove the second part

> earlier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> To create the rule boiler plate all we need to do it run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create the rule boiler plate, all we need to do is run the following command:
```

```
npx codemod-cli generate codemod &lt;name of codemod&gt;
```

> Once the command has finished you should see a new folder with the name of your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the command has finished, you should see a new folder with the name of your
```

code mod and inside should have a folder for your test fixtures along with an

> index.js and test.js file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`index.js` and `test.js` file.
```

> code mod and inside should have a folder for your test fixtures along with an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
code mod. Inside of it, you should find a folder for your test fixtures along with an
```

## Setting up your test fixtures

> Before I start writing the code mod itself I like to setup the test fixtures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before I start writing the code mod itself, I like to set up the test fixtures.
```

Reviewer 2: Actually not sure about set up as you might be using it in the IT/Tech way

Author: I think your are right here

> Inside your `__testfixtures__` you should already have an `*.input.js` file and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inside your `__testfixtures__`, you should already have an `*.input.js` file and
```

> an `*.output,js`. Simply put, the `input.js` file should contain the 'input'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an `*.output,js`. The `input.js` file should contain the 'input'
```

code, or in other words the code to be changed and the `*.output.js` should
contain what you expect the code to be after the code mod has ran. This is what
it would look like for my example:

_basic.input.js_

```javascript
let message = ‘Hello, ‘ + name;
```

_basic.output.js_

```javascript
let message = ‘Hello, ${name}”;
```

If you need to add any more text fixtures you can run the following command:

```
npx codemod-cli generate fixture &lt;name of codemod&gt; &lt;name of fixture&gt;
```

Or simply just create your own `fixture-name.input.js` and
`fixture-name.output.js` in the same folder.

## Creating the code mod

> Now everything has been set up and you have your test fixtures it is time to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once everything has been set up and you have your test fixtures, it is time to
```

> Now everything has been set up and you have your test fixtures it is time to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once everything has been set up and you have your test fixtures, it is time to
```

start writing.

If you open up your index.js file you should find this boiler plate code:

```JavaScript
const { getParser } = require('codemod-cli').jscodeshift;
const { getOptions } = require('codemod-cli');

module.exports = function transformer(file, api) {
  const j = getParser(api);

>   const options = getOptions();

Reviewer: Can you add a note what these do maybe?

  return j(file.source) // this line parses the file to an AST (abstract syntax tree)

>     .find(j.Identifier) // this line finds all nodes on the tree that match the parameter

Reviewer: What are identifiers? Is this saying give me all variable declarations?

>     .forEach((path) => { // The forEach can be removed

Reviewer: What does

> // The forEach can be removed

mean? Or is it a leftover comment for yourself?

>       path.node.name = path.node.name.split('').reverse().join('');

Reviewer: So does this codemod reverse the name of all variables and arguments etc. Is this just the example that's generated by default? I think it'd be good to add some clarification here.

    })
    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';
```

> Our first step is add the correct identifier parameter for the find function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our first step is to add the correct identifier parameter for the find function.
```

The easiest way to do this is to use [astexplorer.net](https://astexplorer.net/)
which can show you code broken down into a syntax tree.

> [AST Explorer](/assets/images/posts/2022-02-05-getting-started-with-code-mods/astExplorer.png)

Reviewer: This links to the image file – see the other posts for examples on how to integrate images in posts, e.g. https://github.com/simplabs/simplabs.github.io/blob/master/_posts/2021-07-13-effective-infrastructure-for-efficient-development-workflows.md?plain=1#L122

> With the autofocus check box enabled it will highlight the tree and the code to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the autofocus check box enabled, it will highlight the tree and the code to
```

> help show you what node is what. Using this we can see that ‘Hello, ‘ + name; is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
help show you what node is what. Using this we can see that `‘Hello, ‘ + name;` is
```

> a `BinaryExpression`. So let's update our code with the correct Identifier and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a `BinaryExpression`. So let's update our code with the correct Identifier:
```

Author: I dont think this works as it changes the meaning

instead of using the `.forEach` we will add `.replaceWith`.

```javascript
const { getParser } = require('codemod-cli').jscodeshift;
const { getOptions } = require('codemod-cli');

module.exports = function transformer(file, api) {
  const j = getParser(api);
  const options = getOptions();

  return j(file.source)
    .find(j.BinaryExpression)

>     .replaceWith((path) => {})

Reviewer: I think a comment like

```suggestion
    .replaceWith((path) => { /* we'll figure out what to put here next */ })
```

might be helpful

    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';
```

> To convert from a BinaryExpression to a templateLiteral we will need to return a

Reviewer 2: The way you write templateLiteral should be consistent throughout the whole post...

Author: 😬 updating now.

`templateLiteral` node from the `replaceWith` function. As we are using the

> babel parser we can use https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-types to help us work

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
babel parser, we can use https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-types to help us work
```

out what we need to create a `templateLiteral`.

![TemplateLiteral Documentation](/assets/images/posts/2022-02-05-getting-started-with-code-mods/templateLiteral.png)

Template literals require an array of TemplateElements, which will be the

> strings and an array of expressions which will be the variables. So for now we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
strings and an array of expressions being the variables. So for now we
```

can update our code to look like this:

```javascript
module.exports = function transformer(file, api) {
  const j = getParser(api);
  const options = getOptions();

  return j(file.source)
    .find(j.BinaryExpression)
    .replaceWith((path) => {
      let quasis = [];
      let expressions = [];

      return j.templateLiteral(quasis, expressions);
    })
    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';

> ```

Reviewer: So this will just replace the entire binary expression with an empty template literal, right? I think it might be helpful to show this intermediate step.

Now we need to extract the information from our BinaryExpression. A

> `BiniaryExpression` has three attributes the `operator`, `left` and `right`. We

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`BinaryExpression` has three attributes the `operator`, `left` and `right`. We
```

> `BinaryExpression` has three attributes the `operator`, `left` and `right`. We

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`BinaryExpression` has three attributes: `operator`, `left`, and `right`. We
```

need to check both `left` and `right` nodes to see if either is a Literal/String
or whether it is an Identifier/variable. If the node is a Literal it needs to be

> converted to a TemplateElement and if the node is a String we need to add it to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
converted to a `TemplateElement` and if the node is a String we need to add it to
```

> or whether it is an Identifier/variable. If the node is a Literal it needs to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or an Identifier/variable. If the node is a Literal, it needs to be
```

> converted to a `TemplateElement` and if the node is a String we need to add it to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
converted to a `TemplateElement`. If the node is a String, we need to add it to
```

the expressions array.

```javascript
const { getParser } = require('codemod-cli').jscodeshift;
const { getOptions } = require('codemod-cli');

module.exports = function transformer(file, api) {
  const j = getParser(api);

  return j(file.source)
    .find(j.BinaryExpression)
    .replaceWith((path) => {
      let quasis = [];
      let expressions = [];
      [path.value.left, path.value.right].forEach((node) => {
        if (node.type === 'Literal') {
          quasis.push(
            j.templateElement({ raw: node.raw, cooked: node.value }, false),
          );
        }
        if (node.type === 'Identifier') {
          expressions.push(node);
        }
      });
      return j.templateLiteral(quasis, expressions);
    })
    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';
```

> That leaves us with this which should now pass our test case, but as you may

Reviewer: Might be nice to show the console output when running the tests for this.

> That leaves us with this which should now pass our test case, but as you may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That leaves us with this code, which should now pass our test case. As you may
```
I don't know if you call it "code", but I'd clarify what you mean by "this".

have noticed by now this implementation has many limitations, what happens if we

> use a number instead of string or have multiple BinaryExpressions, or a minus is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use a number instead of string or have multiple `BinaryExpression`s, or a minus is
```

> have noticed by now this implementation has many limitations, what happens if we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have noticed by now, this implementation has many limitations: what happens if we
```

> use a number instead of string or have multiple `BinaryExpression`s, or a minus is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use a number instead of a string or have multiple `BinaryExpression`s, or a minus is
```

used instead of a plus? Well that is where I will leave you to try and add some

> of your own test cases and see if you can tackle some of the limitations with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of your own test cases and see if you can tackle some of the limitations within
```

---

> title: 'Code mods in JavaScript and how to get started creating your own.'

Reviewer: seems a bit weird to have a point at the end of the headline :)

```suggestion
title: 'Code mods in JavaScript and how to get started creating your own'
```

author: 'Michael Kerr'
github: Mikek2252
twitter: Mikek2252
topic: javascript
bio: 'Senior Software Engineer'

> description: 'A quick introduction into code mods and how to create your own.'

Reviewer: I think we typically include the author:

```suggestion
description: 'Michael Kerr gives a quick introduction into code mods in JavaScript and how to create your own.'
```

often be very error prone and time consuming and that is where code
mods/refactoring tools come in. Code mods are scripts that can be run on
existing code, templates, styles (pretty much anything with the correct parser
and compiler) in order to identify a pattern and then update the code to a new
one.

<!--break-->

For example updating the following code sample from concatenating with the `+`
operator to using a template literal.

```javascript
// Before
let message = 'Hello, ' + name;
// After
let message = `Hello, ${name}`;
```

In the Ember community we love code mods: when deprecations in the framework are
added, there is a good chance that a code mod is created in order to help
everyone migrate their code. The Ember community even has an entire github
organization dedicated to code mods which you can check out here:
[https://github.com/ember-codemods](https://github.com/ember-codemods).

Despite the already great array of code mods available, there may not be one
that covers your needs or fixes your problem. Fear not: making your own isn’t as
complicated as it may seem.

## Setting up your code mod project

> Creating the initial project for a JavaScript or Handlebars code mode could not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating the initial project for a JavaScript or Handlebars code mod could not
```

:)

be simpler thanks to [Robert Jackson's](https://github.com/rwjblue)
[codemod-cli tool](https://github.com/rwjblue/codemod-cli). What is left for you
to do is run the following command and you will have all your prerequisites.

```

> npx codemod-cli new &lt;project-nameglt;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npx codemod-cli new &lt;project-name&gt;
```

// TIP: Make sure to give the project a broad name as
// you can have multiple code mods in this project!.
```

> Once your project has been created, make sure to `cd &lt;project-nameglt;` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once your project has been created, make sure to `cd <project-name>` and
```

I think this is a bit inconsistent – I think within fenced blocks (3 ```) you need to escape, outside you don't…

install your dependencies via your chosen package manager.

## Creating your code mod

Now that the project has been setup and our dependences have been installed it's
time to create our code mod. For the purpose of this post, we will create a rule
for the string concatenation with the plus operator to a template literal.

To create the rule boiler plate, all we need to do is run the following command:

```
npx codemod-cli generate codemod &lt;name of codemod&gt;
```

Once the command has finished, you should see a new folder with the name of your
code mod. Inside of it, you should find a folder for your test fixtures along
with an `index.js` and `test.js` file.

## Setting up your test fixtures

Before I start writing the code mod itself, I like to set up the test fixtures.
Inside your `__testfixtures__`, you should already have an `*.input.js` file and
an `*.output,js`. The `input.js` file should contain the 'input' code, or in
other words the code to be changed and the `*.output.js` should contain what you
expect the code to be after the code mod has ran. This is what it would look
like for my example:

> _basic.input.js_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`basic.input.js`
```

```javascript
let message = ‘Hello, ‘ + name;
```

> _basic.output.js_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`basic.output.js`
```

```javascript
let message = ‘Hello, ${name}”;
```

If you need to add any more text fixtures you can run the following command:

```
npx codemod-cli generate fixture &lt;name of codemod&gt; &lt;name of fixture&gt;
```

Or simply just create your own `fixture-name.input.js` and
`fixture-name.output.js` in the same folder.

## Creating the code mod

Once everything has been set up and you have your test fixtures, it is time to
start writing.

> If you open up your index.js file you should find example code mod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you open up your `index.js` file you should find an example code mod:
```

```JavaScript
const { getParser } = require('codemod-cli').jscodeshift;

module.exports = function transformer(file, api) {
  const j = getParser(api); // this line fetches the parse which in this case is jscodeshift's default parser

  return j(file.source) // this line parses the file to an AST (abstract syntax tree)
    .find(j.Identifier) // this line finds all nodes on the tree that match the parameter
    .forEach((path) => {
      path.node.name = path.node.name.split('').reverse().join('');
    })
    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';
```

This example finds all `identifiers`(the name for a variable) and reverses the
name.

Our first step is to add the correct identifier parameter for the find function.
The easiest way to do this is to use [astexplorer.net](https://astexplorer.net/)
which can show you code broken down into a syntax tree.

![AST Explorer](/assets/images/posts/2022-02-05-getting-started-with-code-mods/astExplorer.png)

With the autofocus check box enabled, it will highlight the tree and the code to

> help show you what node is what. Using this we can see that `‘Hello, ‘ + name;`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
help show you what node is what. Using this we can see that `'Hello, ' + name;`
```

is a `BinaryExpression`. So let's update our code with the correct Identifier
and instead of using the `.forEach` we will add `.replaceWith`.

```javascript
const { getParser } = require('codemod-cli').jscodeshift;

module.exports = function transformer(file, api) {
  const j = getParser(api);

  return j(file.source)
    .find(j.BinaryExpression)
    .replaceWith((path) => {
      /* we'll figure out what to put here next */
    })
    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';
```

To convert from a `BinaryExpression` to a `TemplateLiteral` we will need to
return a `TemplateLiteral` node from the `replaceWith` function. As we are using
the babel parser, we can use https://babeljs.io/docs/en/babel-types to help us
work out what we need to create a `TemplateLiteral`.

![TemplateLiteral Documentation](/assets/images/posts/2022-02-05-getting-started-with-code-mods/templateLiteral.png)

> `TemplateLiterals` require an array of `TemplateElement`s, which will be the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`TemplateLiteral`s require an array of `TemplateElement`s, which will be the
```

attributes: `operator`, `left` and `right`. We need to check both `left` and
`right` nodes to see if either is a `StringLiteral` or whether it is an
`Identifier`/variable. If the node is a `StringLiteral`, it needs to be
converted to a `TemplateElement`. If the node is an `Identifier`, we need to add
it to the expressions array.

That leaves us with this code:

```javascript
const { getParser } = require('codemod-cli').jscodeshift;

module.exports = function transformer(file, api) {
  const j = getParser(api);

  return j(file.source)
    .find(j.BinaryExpression)
    .replaceWith((path) => {
      let quasis = [];
      let expressions = [];
      [path.value.left, path.value.right].forEach((node) => {
        if (node.type === 'StringLiteral') {
          quasis.push(
            j.templateElement(
              { raw: node.extra.rawValue, cooked: node.value },
              false,
            ),
          );
        }
        if (node.type === 'Identifier') {
          expressions.push(node);
        }
      });
      return j.templateLiteral(quasis, expressions);
    })
    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';
```

Now let's run our test case to see if it passes.

> ![Test success screenshot](/assets/images/posts/2022-02-05-getting-started-with-code-mods/test-success-screenshot.png)

Reviewer: This includes an _"is idempotent"_ test but that's not in the fixtures you show above which is a bit confusing? Might it make sense to share the complete tests here or explain what that _"is idempotent"_ test is briefly?

Author: @marcoow I added a little line about it, to be honest i didnt realise it was there until you pointed it out

That test case has passed, but as you may have noticed by now, this
implementation has many limitations: what happens if we use a number instead of
a string or have multiple `BinaryExpression`s, or a minus is used instead of a
plus? Well that is where I will leave you to try and add some of your own test
cases and see if you can tackle some of the limitations within this code mod.

If you would like to learn more about code mods and AST's check out

> [this workshop](https://github.com/simplabs/ast-workshop) by Simplabs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[this workshop](https://github.com/simplabs/ast-workshop) by simplabs.
```

        if (node.type === 'StringLiteral') {
          quasis.push(
            j.templateElement(
              { raw: node.extra.rawValue, cooked: node.value },
              false,
            ),
          );
        }
        if (node.type === 'Identifier') {
          expressions.push(node);
        }
      });
      return j.templateLiteral(quasis, expressions);
    })
    .toSource();
};

module.exports.type = 'js';
```

Now let's run our test case to see if it passes.

![Test success screenshot](/assets/images/posts/2022-02-05-getting-started-with-code-mods/test-success-screenshot.png)
**Note `is idempotent` is a test added by codemod-cli to check that rerunning
the code mod will always give the same result**

That test case has passed, but as you may have noticed by now, this
implementation has many limitations: what happens if we use a number instead of
a string or have multiple `BinaryExpression`s, or a minus is used instead of a
plus? Well that is where I will leave you to try and add some of your own test
cases and see if you can tackle some of the limitations within this code mod.

If you would like to learn more about code mods and AST's check out

> [this workshop](https://github.com/simplabs/ast-workshop) by simplabs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[our AST workshop](https://github.com/simplabs/ast-workshop).
```
